---
layout: post 
title: Draft App and Content Creation
summary: Thoughts on the future of the Draft internet writing software. 
---
[Draft](http://draftin.com) is a recent graduate of [YCombinator](http://ycombinator.com). Their service seems  basic - they provide minimalist internet writing software. No hyperlinks or bold buttons, no logo on the writing interface - Draft just focuses on the creation of content. 

The obvious question is, "How is this different from Google Drive?" Software such as Microsoft Word has dominated the content creation arena for years. Does a small couple-person startup really think that they can disrupt this industry? 

While I was skeptical at first, the more I have written with Draft, the more I realize that it is simply a pleasure to use. While the focus is on version control, the true beauty of the system lies in its minimalist interface - without bold buttons, hyperlink keys, and exhaustive font choices, I find myself finishing articles more quickly. This follows a recent trend of making interfaces disappear - like Square attempting to make payment a walletless procedure or car keys being replaced with fobs that never leave the pocket, consumers recognize the value of a product that transparently function. 

While users may adopt the functional interface, the question by YCombinator investors remains - "How will it make money?"

Draft launched with a paid service for essay editing. While I have never used it, I imagine that it was a smoothly outsourced service that produced mediocre results in terms of editing, but encouraged writers to publish their content. 

More recently, Draft launched a paid voice and video transcription service. While new, I expect Draft to realize the massive business market previously cornered by the Livescribe pen, where professionals seek a way to condense media from focus groups, meetings, and conferences into searchable text for future reference. With the transcription service, I expect that Draft will realize that those who seek to publish content in some form are willing to pay. 

In the coming months, I anticipate yet another pivot by Draft - <span class="highlight">content creation as a service</span>. The lessons so far will teach them that content creators seek a "pat on the shoulder" and a "kick in the pants" while writing content. In a world where social media dominance skyrockets people like Tim Ferris to the New York Times Bestsellers List, creating popular content in the form of blogs has become apart of the new American dream. Similar to the recent popularity of coding, gaining traffic and revenue from self-created web content appeals to both the technical and non-technical because it offers riches, privilege, and independence. This goal roots itself in content creation - drafting articles, podcasts, and videos that will "go viral." This is the lucrative market that Draft circles - allowing regular people to thrive on the idea of digital stardom by providing accessible content creation tools. 

The service Blogmutt already provides a similar, albeit more business-to-business, tool for automated blogging. With them, pay  $89 dollars per month, and keep the flow of articles on your corporate blogs that win the SEO wars. 

While a business-to-business tool offers to provide steady income and sane customers, providing automated content creation tools for more normal consumers can prove significantly more lucrative by hitting the same cord that Google Adsense or Outbrain hits - the opportunity for success with a wide audience. 

Draft's next steps are moving toward monetizing the content creation market - the average person who wants to create the next popular blog, but only lacks the articles to do so. 

Like my marketing professor who said that, "People who buy a drill don't want a drill - they just want a hole in the wall," Draft is positioned to monetize those who don't want to write - they just want an article in their damn blog. 


The lucrative future - like entrepreneurial books that feed those that will never create - Draft provides the convenient opportunity to create personal brand, blaze a path independent of a 9-5 job, and differentiate with unique content. In a world dominated by social media giants, aspiring to stardom no longer requires singing skills on American Idol - it requires self-publishing content that people like, and the means to that future is monetizing the dream of internet fame. Draft is on the path to capitalize on this. 