---
layout: post
title: A Tale of Two Remote Companies
description: A look at telecommuting based on two recently published books, The Year without Pants by Scott Berkun of Automattic, and Remote by Jason Fried and David Heinemeier Hansson of 37Signals
category: essay
---
In the past month, employees at two software companies have published books documenting their companies’ experiences with fully remote workforces. Marissa Mayer brought attention to remote work earlier this year when she fully prohibited the practice for Yahoo employees. With the publication of these books, successful software companies Automattic and 37Signals bring a soundness to the discussion of remote workforces with a holistic look at their management practices.

In [The Year Without Pants: WordPress.com and the Future of Work](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1118660633/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1118660633&linkCode=as2&tag=sagacionlook-20), Scott Berkun details his year as an engineering manager at [Automattic](http://automattic.com/). Founded in 2005, Automattic builds web publishing platforms. Their flagship product, [Wordpress.com](http://wordpress.com), stands as one of the fifteen most-trafficked websites in the world. At its core, a group of 215 remote employees manage the company’s infrastructure and technology. Scott draws on his experience as a senior project manager at Microsoft and as a best-selling author to share his experience of remotely managing an international team for a year at Automattic. 

37Signals partners Jason Fried and David Heinemeier Hansson co-authored [Remote: Office Not Required](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0804137501/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0804137501&linkCode=as2&tag=sagacionlook-20), to share wisdom from managing their remote team over the course of the last decade. Currently consisting of 38 employees, [37Signals](http://37signals.com) produces productivity web applications. Their previous book about business strategy, [Rework](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0307463745/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0307463745&linkCode=as2&tag=sagacionlook-20), was an international best-seller. Millions of customers use their flagship project management software, Basecamp. Remote serves as a resource for managing all aspects of a remote workforce, ranging from work-life balance to communication to accounting concerns. 

Both 37Signals and Automattic have strong roots in open source software. Automattic founder Matt Mullenberg developed the open-source Wordpress blogging software that currently powers 19% of websites on the internet. 37Signals open-sourced the framework Ruby on Rails based on the original code for Basecamp. Popularized by young software companies, Ruby on Rails served as the original software core of Twitter, Github, and Groupon. 

Effective communication serves as a core competency at both Automattic and 37Signals, as it becomes clear that the companies sell software that is equally important as internal tools as revenue-generating products. Scott Berkun mentions the Wordpress-based communication tool P2 exactly 100 times in his book for its use as the preferred message board for everything from bug tracking to socialization. 37Signals manages its workforce with about 40 Basecamp projects, and it facilitates casual employee socialization with its Campfire chat tool.

For books that focus on remote collaboration, much value is placed on in-person meetings between employees. Both companies still keep physical offices as headquarters. Multiple times per year, both 37Signals and Automattic bring employees together for an extended in-person meeting with the goal of socialization and planning. Maintaining culture and a sense of comradery for remote workers necessitates these seemingly lavish meetings, which may offset any fiscal benefit of eschewing a traditional office.

The culture at Automattic clearly values independence, with different internal teams operating as functionally separate entities. Scott Berkun’s book follows his personal and professional journey as a remote software manager. When Scott joined Automattic, he was greeted by a discordant environment with loose deadlines, limited communication, and poor technical accountability. New to telecommunicating, The Year Without Pants documents his adaptation to remote management, and by the end of his short year-long tenure, how he bonded with his team, coordinated better communication, and released software with improved reliability and maintainability within the bounds of the existing culture. 

While The Year Without Pants documents the experiences of a remote worker, Remote shares the insight that that comes from the extensive experience in remote work by its management. The topics in Remote crisply provide actionable insights that Scott documented through trial and error in his book. Remote’s more unique value comes from topics such as employee retention,  maintaining creativity, and scaling their workforce that only years of experience can provide.

While a myriad of professions such as manufacturing or healthcare will functionally always depend on in-person workers, these books demonstrate the success of software companies with remote work, and they provide a framework that may be applied to other computer-based companies such as accounting, publishing, and consulting. With companies like Google and Yahoo revolutionizing the idea of corporate perks with private chefs and laundry services, the stories of Automattic and 37Signals raise the question of whether independence and freedom will become the next desires of cutting-edge workforces. 

