---
layout: post
title: Tito - The Rational Dictator?
description: Josip Broz Tito and Communism in Yugoslavia
---
<div class="panel panel-info">
    <div class="panel-heading">
        <h3 class="panel-title">
            Article Background
        </h3>
    </div>
    <div class="panel-body">
        <p>I came across the below report while cleaning up an old laptop. It is a look at <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Josip_Broz_Tito">Josip Broz Tito</a>, the President of Yugoslavia. I wrote it seven years ago while in high school.  Some of the citation links are broken and the writing style is different, but its analysis still intrigues me.  </p>

        <p>My family emigrated from Yugoslavia, and I had used the below report to explore the history of the country. I found that the leadership of Yugoslavia was quite dissimilar to that of the USSR, and that Tito's foreign policy was surprisingly adroit.
        </p>
    </div>
</div>

“That is our basic principle: Democracy and freedom of the individual” stated the leader of a European country. Few would venture to guess that country at hand was a Communist government, let alone that the statement was very defining of the government. This statement was made by Josip Broz Tito, Communist dictator of Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia was a hodgepodge of Baltic countries whose only similarity was their government. The people of Yugoslavia seemed to have defied the stereotype of communism, being ruled by a man who did not need to synthesize lies to control the people, and who was even openly against the Soviet Union. Tito was known to act under the slogan, “Death to Fascism! Freedom to the People!”, which he frequently exclaimed. Josip Broz Tito was a pragmatic dictator whose actions focused on keeping Yugoslavia united and free of enemies.
Josip Broz’s childhood did not seem to influence his future, but rather foreshadow it. He was born Josip Broz in a Croatian village with a Slovenian mother and a Croatian father, and he was the seventh of fifteen children [<a href="#cite-4">4</a>]. Tito was from a large family, but many of his siblings did not live beyond a young age, so Tito was used to being surrounded by a relatively callous family, which can explain why Tito never had many prominent or long-lasting relationship with other people as an adult. Tito’s differing parentage was a major factor when Tito was responsible for the assimilation of many different ethnic groups which had previously been adversaries. While Tito was a teenager he planned to emigrate to the United States [<a href="#cite-5">5</a>]. This may seem slightly irrelevant, but it shows that Tito was not a stern supporter of strict communism as a child, and this foretells Tito’s relatively free style of Communism and his broken relations with the USSR. This fact is also extremely important because it not only predicts Tito’s dissociation with the USSR, but also of Tito’s successful cooperation with the US while dictator. In fact, it was not until Tito left home that he discovered communism.

 Tito did not have any serious dedication to politics until he was involuntarily immersed in it when he was conscripted in to the Austo-Hungarian army. Tito was introduced to communism when he was wounded and taken prisoner by the Russians and, during his captivity, he experienced the Russian Revolution and became a Bolshevik [<a href="#cite-8">8</a>]. This is where Tito saw how governments could be overthrown and that a small group of determined people could change history forever. Tito was able to observe not only how communism worked and how it was put in place, but he was able to do so from the point of view of a citizen and then as an official in the ruling party. Tito returned to Yugoslavia on the authority of the Soviet government and, when the Germans invaded Yugoslavia in April 1941, Tito, “took to the hills” [<a href="#cite-5">5</a>]. Tito fought and repelled the Germans as a guerilla force, not as a government, so he established his reputation both domestically and internationally before he instilled the Yugoslavian government during the time of vulnerability. When Tito fought the Germans he was not only endorsed by the USSR but by the Allied Powers too, which was the beginning of Tito’s many political allies. As Josip Broz transitioned from a lost teenager in to a communist leader, the adding of the surname “Tito” accompanied the endorsements of the people he ruled and the support of many superpowers which would guarantee a smooth transfer of power, and the creation of a strong enemy.

Tito’s approach to foreign policy was not of asserting Yugoslavia upon other nations but rather of ensuring its long-term survival. Tito was not afraid to accept money from other nations, but it was only accepted if there were no stipulations, which led to the formally adopted Nonalignment Movement [<a href="#cite-4">4</a>]. Tito’s nonalignment principal defined how he dealt with all countries, where he acted for the long-term survival of Yugoslavia. Tito never helped any other country except, mysteriously, third world countries, which had little to offer him in return. Yugoslav citizens were not allowed to salute any other country’s boats except the Soviet vessels, even if they were carrying much-needed aide [<a href="#cite-5">5</a>]. This is significant because Tito was still loyal to one country, the USSR, but when Yugoslavia was abandoned by the Soviet Union it left only one country to whom the citizens could show their allegiance- Yugoslavia. This action also sent a clear message to the people of Yugoslavia- that the citizens should be thankful that Tito and the Yugoslav government had obtained the aide, not that the United States or another foreign country was providing it. Tito was smart enough to notice that Yugoslavia would not be unjustifiably attacked, so he worked to keep Yugoslavia transparent.

Tito’s relations with the Soviet Union were the backbone of Yugoslavia’s creation, yet the ending of this relationship almost destroyed the country. Tito was a follower of Stalin and was endorsed by him when he first gained control of Yugoslavia, but when Stalin criticized some of Tito’s actions and Tito rejected the comments Yugoslavia was expelled from the Communist International Party (Cominform) which was responsible for instilling Tito’s power in the first place [<a href="#cite-8">8</a>]. Tito depended on the USSR at the beginning of his rule, but he was able to abandon the Soviets so effectively because Tito’s citizens and military were loyal to him, not the USSR.  Tito turning against the USSR seemed to be very much against his non-confrontational attitude, especially when one considers that Yugoslavia’s mountainous terrain may have been the only major factor that kept Stalin from invading, but Tito’s actions would help him in the long term with his relations with the Allied Forces. In fact, Yugoslavia’s standard of living was higher than that of any country inside the Iron Curtain and Tito was praised for his insubordination of Russia by the citizens, even if his communist government was unpopular [<a href="#cite-5">5</a>]. The citizens of Yugoslavia were faced with a seemingly atypical situation- the dictatorship that was ruling them was keeping undesired powers out of their country, while keeping the lives of its citizens fairly opulent. The communism may not have been popular, but the citizens had jobs and the republics were peaceful, which one sees is not apparent today without communism. Tito’s society seemed to thrive because he carried out the will of the people, yet his society’s dependence on him is the reason Yugoslavia no longer exists. 

Tito’s wish to emigrate to the United States as a child made Tito non-hostile to the United States, unlike the Soviets. Tito asked for weapons from the US and said that they needed no compensation because, “The U.S. has been getting something for several years- Yugoslav resistance to the Soviet bloc” [<a href="#cite-5">5</a>]. Tito realized that his greatest power on the world stage was not what he had to offer but rather his actions of defiance of the USSR. Tito was successful in his dealings because he did not pursue agreements with desperation- he let them come to him where he held the upper hand. In addition to providing the weapons for Tito’s soldiers, “Several hundred Yugoslav officers have been trained in the U.S. and on U.S. bases in Europe.” [<a href="#cite-5">5</a>]. The United States training Yugoslav officers was a mutualistic agreement, as Tito received military training that had been created to counter the Soviets, while the United States gained loyalty from Tito’s military. This is a prime example of how Tito’s abandoning of the Soviets may have been beneficial because the Soviets may have had no motivation to provide Tito with such complex training free of provisos. Tito’s pragmatic approach to communism and idealism allowed him to accomplish much as he reaped the benefits of associating himself with so many countries.

The Yugoslav people under Tito not only had a stable government but had a very open style of living not commonly associated with Communism. “Tito allowed freer exchange of people and ideas than most of the countries in the bloc.” [<a href="#cite-2">2</a>]. Tito’s communism was very unique in that people were freely allowed in and out of the country, quickly making Yugoslavia a vacation destination for Western Europeans. Tito allowing his citizens to leave Yugoslavia meant that Yugoslav citizens were not illuded or lied to because those shrouds would have easily been removed outside of the country. “Tito is credited, and rightfully so, for keeping Yugoslavia together for so long, for better or worse.” [<a href="#cite-7">7</a>]. One of the biggest challenges facing Tito was the diversity of Yugoslavia’s people who had previously been isolated in what became the six republics that formed Yugoslavia. Tito’s ability to assimilate these people can be attributed to his large family with parents of differing nationalities, and the traveling Tito did as a young adult. Tito’s pragmatic style of communism was proven so effective because his citizens were allowed to leave the country, and they returned out of their own free will.

Tito’s people may have had one of the highest standards of living for communist countries, yet Tito still had a political agenda that he occasionally used illicit methods to complete. Tito had a secret police called the UDBA that “methodically found, imprisoned and even executed  a large number of Nazi collaborators, Catholic priests, those who had opposed the communist-led war effort, and even communists who did not agree with Tito.” [<a href="#cite-2">2</a>]. Unlike the secret police forces of other communist nations, the UDBA actually fought an internal threat of subversion- the Nazis. The UDBA continued Tito’s pattern of ensuring that the all citizens were apart of the majority because Tito understood the damage a minority could cause, and how delicate the structures holding together the six republics of Yugoslavia were. Tito pitilessly intimidated, imprisoned and even murdered his political opponents, and the Communist Party received 90% of the vote in one election yet, “Tito was so popular that he would probably have won easily without resorting to terror.”[<a href="#cite-4">4</a>]. This is yet another example of Tito fearing the minority, which may have meant that Tito felt that he could not change the minds of all of the people, but that it was his responsibility to make sure that the majority was the only group. Tito may have eliminated his opponents feeling that he was already supported by the majority, so it was then his responsibility to eliminate the other candidates so that small groups of people did not have the opportunity to form dissentious opinions and not only destroy Tito’s government, but also the unity of the republics of Yugoslavia. Tito was not a man who attempted to control the people, but one who simply tried to keep them together.

Tito gained support and power by fighting the Nazis, but the Nazis then became Tito’s main threat of insurrection as they fought Tito both from outside Yugoslavia and from the inside. “If the country does indeed face an immediate external threat of subversion, Yugoslavs have no illusions about its source.” [<a href="#cite-4">4</a>]. Tito actually had a real external threat, so he did not have to synthesize lies to control the people. Tito’s pragmatic approach to communism continued to thrive as he was able to control and unite the people using truth.  A Time Magazine author wrote about visiting one of Tito’s palaces, stating, “A few weeks ago 15 German stukas dive-bombed the lofty crag in full daylight with no more effect than fleabites on a bull’s skin.” [<a href="#cite-3">3</a>]. Tito’s external threat, the Nazis, realized that the main force keeping Yugoslavia together was Tito, so eliminating him would not simply damage the façade of the Yugoslav government but could cause the republics of Yugoslavia to return to being enemies yet again, making the region vulnerable to Nazi rule. In addition to actively attacking Tito, the Nazis tried assassinations, yet none of their efforts worked and Tito lived to be one of the longest-ruling dictators in history. The Nazi’s attacks may have actually been uniting the Yugoslavs, and therefore keeping Yugoslavia together.

Josip Broz Tito’s pragmatic actions were not focused on furthering his financial success or gaining more power, but of balancing the delicate structure of the Yugoslav republics, and of protecting the people from themselves. Tito seemed to have been very successful when he ruled, but Yugoslavia was so dependent on him that his death destabilized the whole government not only morally but structurally. “He was somebody very close, like in my own family,” said a common Yugoslav citizen, Nikola Margis, 68, after Tito’s death at the lying-in-state. “For 35 years we lived together, and we had only good things from him.” [<a href="#cite-6">6</a>]. One of Tito’s former colleagues, Milovan Djilas, seemed to have been able to candidly characterize Tito’s approach to ruling - “His attitude is that of a good father.” [<a href="#cite-1">1</a>].


<h5>Sources</h5>
<small>
    <div id="cite-1">
    1. "Good Father." Time 3 July 1978. 13 Mar. 2007 <Http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,946001,00.html>.  
    </div><div id="cite-2">
    2. "Josip Broz Tito." CNN. 13 Mar. 2007 <Http://www.cnn.com/SPECIALS/cold.wr/kbank/profiles/tito/>.  
    </div><div id="cite-3">
    3. Pribichevich, Stoyan. "Tito's Yugoslavia." Time 22 May 1944. 13 Mar. 2007 <Http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,796611,00.html>.  
    </div><div id="cite-4">
    4. "The Maverick Who Defied Moscow." Time 12 May 1980. 13 Mar. 2007 <Http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,920871,00.html>.  
    </div><div id="cite-5">
    5. "The Peasant's Son." Time 6 June 1955. 13 Mar. 2007 <Http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,807165,00.html>.  
    </div><div id="cite=6"> 
    6. "Tito's Epochal Funeral." Time 19 May 1980. 13 Mar. 2007 <Http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,924105,00.html>.  
    </div><div id="cite-7">
    7. "Tito's Yugoslavia." GlobalSecurity.Org. 27 Mar. 2005. 13 Mar. 2007 <Http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/wr/yugo-hist2.htm>.  
    </div><div id="cite-8">
    8. "TITO, Josip Broz." History.Com. 13 Mar. 2007 <http://www.history.com/encyclopedia.do?articleId=224206>.  
    </div>
</small>


